us for the weeks, then you probably know we are working through the topic of transformation.
We've been doing this for a little while, and we're going to keep doing it for a while.
And today, I'm just going to say the thing out loud, which is it's a bit of a weird Sunday.
Scout Sunday, not something really do much.
Transfiguration Sunday.
Also, some of you are like, what's that?
Never heard that word before, much less calling it like the Sunday that we're celebrating.
Let me back up.
So the church calendar, as a whole, for centuries and centuries across the globe celebrates various holidays or events on a given Sunday, or at various points in the year.
We all know of Christmas, we all know of Easter, and then the church worldwide has chosen at various points to put other things on the map of the church calendar.
This coming Wednesday, as I've already said, is Ash Wednesday and begins a season of Lent.
I've brought Lent to the church when I first got here because I remember growing up as a kid,
walking into an Easter Sunday where everyone's talking about how awesome Easter is and me thinking, oh, it's Easter.
I guess we're doing that this Sunday.
And it felt way too casual.
It felt like, oh, I missed the opportunity for the lead-up.
And for those of you who celebrate Christmas, as we all do,
We know that it's the lead up to Christmas.
It's the excitement of it and the anticipation.
It's the build up to the big day that makes the big day special.
Easter is similar but different.
Ash Wednesday and Lent begins this process.
It's really the process that I'm talking about and have been talking about and we'll be talking about for a while of transformation.
It's this opportunity to dig down deep and to be intentional about the practices that we practice, the things that we say that we love, the things that we give up, the new things that we take on.
And the hope is at the end of the 40 days of Lent, you get to Easter and a real resurrection happens.
Of course, Jesus' resurrection that we will all celebrate together and it will be festive,
That would be wonderful as a community.
But the hope, too, is that there's a work that God will have been doing in your hearts.
So at the end of Lent, something genuinely new is popping up into your life.
I think that's what Lent in the season of Lent offers to all of us.
Well, if you just back up a few days to, well, today, Transfiguration Sunday,
Now normally I don't talk about transfiguration Sunday, like ever, except maybe one other time.
But this time was different.
And here's why.
You see,
The word metamorphosis is the word we all know from our days of being kids and caterpillars going into butterflies.
We know what metamorphosis is.
This is a good Greek word, and it really only shows up twice in our New Testament.
We've already talked about these passages.
One is Romans, chapter 12, where to be transformed by the renewing of our minds.
The other is in 2 Corinthians 3.
And this is another one that we've already talked about at length, which is about being transformed by what we behold, right, if you remember this sermon.
But truth be told, the word actually does show up three other times, well, two other times, we'll say three.
And it's this word right here, it's transfiguration.
And why the translators chose to use transfiguration instead of just transformation, I don't know,
It's the same exact word.
We easily could have called this transformation Sunday in the passage that was read this morning from Matthew 17 about Jesus' transfiguration could very easily have been understood as Jesus' transformation.
And it's the same thing.
And so I thought to myself, well, of all years to celebrate transfiguration Sunday, this is the year because this is what we're talking about.
And then that got me thinking about any number of other things.
And of course, that is what I want to share with you in the sermon.
But before we do, let's pray together.
God, our Father in heaven, you sent your son Jesus Christ as a baby who grew into a man who lived.
He taught us how to live.
And he showed us the way, and he raised up disciples, and he showed them the way.
And then, Lord, he died for us.
He went to Calvary, and he again showed us the way that eternal life begins with his death.
But it doesn't actually end there.
It starts, but then he is raised from the dead.
And with that simple act, that singular act in history, Lord, you have made a way for all of us to die to the things that we need to die to and to be raised anew, a new being, a new way of walking through the world, a life that has been energized by your life.
And so God today, on this Sunday,
We ask, Lord, that you begin to stir in our hearts those places where you so desperately and deeply want to change us.
In Christ's holy name we pray.
Amen.
All right, so today we are indeed talking about the transfiguration.
We already read the passage.
I don't need to reread that for you.
Hopefully you were paying attention as you've maybe heard the story before, but it's not the most common one, right?
You may not know where this sits in the story of Jesus himself.
So here's where it sits.
Peter has just confessed to Jesus.
Like Jesus asks this disciple, who are people saying that I am?
And Peter gets the answer right and says, you are the Christ, son of the living God.
And then Jesus says, you've got it.
You can see what it seems other people can't see.
And then he says,
Now I must go to Jerusalem and die and be raised again."
And Peter's, of course, confused by this.
And then the very next scene is the transfiguration where Jesus takes three disciples, Peter and two others, and they go up on a mountain.
And then before the three disciples, well, Jesus turns bright white and then Elijah and Moses appear.
And then there's a booming voice from heaven that says, this is my beloved son.
You should listen to him.
That's what God says, right?
And then Peter kind of stammers around and he's like, I should set up some tents for you guys.
Like I should do something and then Jesus kind of quiets him and then pretty soon everyone's gone.
And it's just Jesus by himself once again.
This is very mysterious mystical experience.
And this morning, I want you to reflect not on Jesus as much, though that too, of course, but on Peter.
Like, what if you were Peter?
Peter's probably like maybe 18 or something at this point.
He's a young man, not too much older than
y'all sitting in the front rows here, and he has this wild experience where he has been with Jesus for years and he has seen a lot of things happen, but this one might take the cake and he goes up the mountain and he's watching his master, his lord, the one he has just confessed is the Christ, suddenly
Moses and Elijah up here, and then they're talking to Jesus, and Jesus is turning bright white.
You better believe this is the kind of experience that Peter's gonna remember the rest of his life, right?
I mean, you would, wouldn't you?
I certainly would.
And maybe just backing up a second.
Do you have an experience in your life?
Maybe not quite this dramatic, but kind of dramatic.
Maybe a spiritual experience.
I was listening to a gentleman interviewed this week.
His name is Dale Allison.
And he is a scholar of New Testament studies.
And I greatly admire his work.
I have for a long time.
But I had never heard this story.
He was telling a story about when he was 16.
And he said he's standing out in the yard at night.
And it was a clear sky.
There were stars everywhere.
And he said, I don't know how to explain it other than it seemed like all of the stars descended from heaven and just wrapped around me.
And I knew that I was in the presence of God and it was warm and it was loving.
And he said, ever since then, I have set my sights and heart on following the ways of God and wanting to proceed down the path of what God wants to do for me.
This one experience for him, obviously very dramatic.
I've not had one quite like that.
But it has propelled his entire life.
He's now an older man who's done lots of great scholarship over his lifetime.
And it started when he was 16, and he had this divine experience.
Similarly, though, maybe opposite,
I was at the hypothermia shelter this week and on Monday night, I was cutting hair and I was sitting with a gentleman and I was cutting his hair.
By the way, I don't have hair to cut, but I have been cutting my boy's hair for years, 18 years to be precise.
And so I'm okay with it for men.
I would never, ladies, you do not want me cutting your hair.
But I can't highlight hair.
This is true.
I used to highlight candles here.
So I'm there with a man who at present is homeless.
He has no home.
And I am trying to strike up a conversation.
And so I say to him, hey, why don't you tell me a story about something that has happened in your life?
that is like a powerful spiritual experience for you.
And he said, oh, I've got one.
When I was a very young man 20 years ago, there was a dark force in the room with me and I could see it.
And it was pinning me to the bed.
I couldn't breathe and I couldn't get up.
I cried out in Jesus name and it left.
I thought, well, that is.
powerful experience, indeed.
Again, opposite, but no doubt.
So he immediately like knew.
He was ready.
And so he tells me this.
And then he says, again, this experience has propelled him through his life to be a spiritually minded man because he knows no other way to understand and explain the world around him other than through the lens of
the spiritual realm.
Peter, when he's a young man, he has this very spiritual experience with Jesus.
No doubt he actually probably had many.
He saw things we would all love to have seen or to see.
But this one, this one's stuck with him.
And we know this because when we're reading Peter's letters,
He actually mentions this experience.
If you will, like, turn with me to second Peter, chapter one, which is the text I want to read through for the sermon today.
Second Peter is near the end of your New Testament.
It's like just a couple books before Revelation.
And we're in chapter one.
As you're trying to find your way there, I'll read a little bit of the part that
that connects what I want to say with the transfiguration because it's starting in about 16 where he clearly makes this connection in his mind.
Peter, versus leading up to it, he says that he's an old man.
He's dying at this point.
And so the Peter who was 18 and had this transfiguration experience is now, I don't know,
70, maybe 60, who knows how old he is at this point.
He's nearing his death though, he says, and he remembers.
And he says, we did not follow cleverly devised myths when we may known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but we were eyewitnesses of his majesty.
Like we saw, yeah, this isn't the passage yet, you can pull that down.
He's saying we saw
On that day, on that mountain, we were there when this thing happened.
The honor and the glory that they were eyewitnesses to.
So he says in verse 17, when we received honor and glory from God the Father and the voice was born to him by the majestic glory.
And this is a key idea here is the glory.
This is the white, the bright.
This is my beloved son with whom I am well pleased, which is
says on the mountain of transfiguration.
He says, we ourselves heard this very voice born from heaven, for we were with him on that holy mountain.
And again, here he is.
Here's Peter at the end of his life.
He's recalling that he had this experience and he saw Jesus transfigured.
And then he says, we ourselves heard the voice and in verse 19, we have the prophetic word more fully confirmed to which you will do well to pay attention as to a lamp shining in a dark place until the day dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts.
You will do well to pay attention, which is
Basically what God said, right?
So the booming voice says, this is my son whom I'm pleased with.
And then God says, listen to him, right?
Pay attention to him.
And so now Peter, all these many years later is coming along and he's saying, look, we didn't just make this stuff up.
We were eyewitnesses to it all.
And we saw what happened to Jesus.
We've relayed all of this to you.
You can trust us and you would do well to pay attention, to listen to what he said.
Okay.
In some ways, that's the end of this sermon.
If we would all do well, if we just paid a little more attention and listened more to what Jesus has said and is trying to do in us.
The text I want to read from, however, is backed up in verse three.
And this is where my tech team can put this back up and we'll read together how Peter starts this letter.
He begins and he says, his divine power has granted to us all things that pertain to life and to godliness through the knowledge of him who called us
to his own glory and excellence.
There's a few things happening here.
Peter, as I've said, is no longer the 18-year-old man boy.
He's now a 70-year-old man who is weathered and has grown and has himself been transfigured or transformed.
over a lifetime.
And he's looking back on his life, and he's advising you and me and anyone who will listen to him in these letters.
And he's telling us about how this transformation looks, how it works.
And he's saying that he is a different man.
And how does it happen?
Well, it begins very... Sunday school answer.
Jesus.
It begins with Jesus.
His divine power, which has been then granted, has been given, starts with Jesus.
His divine power is granted to all of us, and it pertains to two things.
And these are very important to me, and they should be to you to life, like an abundant kind of life life.
a life that only Jesus can offer, a life that only God, the God of the universe who breathes life into everything, only that kind of life that can be offered by God.
That is what we're talking about here.
And then the second is godliness, which is you can't have godliness apart from God.
And so if Jesus is the manifestation of God, then Jesus offers us
these two things.
He offers us this divine kind of life, and he offers us a path toward godliness.
And if the path toward godliness sounds boring or dusty to you, I promise it's not.
It's not intended to be.
And it is filled with joy and all of the best things that life has to offer.
And so this is what he wants, life and godliness.
And then he says, through the knowledge of him.
And here is where we might go off the rails if we're not careful.
Because knowledge, as you and I often think of it, is a Greek word would be gnosis.
It's like, if I can just shove the right things in my head, well, then I am a Christian, I guess.
I would submit to you that there are many, many, many Christians
who know all of the right things, but they do not have the kind of knowledge that is talked about right here in 2 Peter.
This is not gnosis, this is epi-gnosis.
Oh, so close, but also different.
It is a deep kind of knowledge, a knowledge that comes not from like studying the right books, but a knowledge that comes from following a master.
from doing what that person says to do, reaching him or her again and again and again and following in their steps and doing the kinds of things that they do.
And so maybe it's like a chef and you are learning, you're the sous chef alongside the chef.
And when they do some cutting, you do some cutting.
And when they do some broiling, you do some broiling and you get the idea, right?
Jesus here,
Jesus is our chef and we are his sous chef.
He is our master and we are his student.
And we should be following in the footsteps of his ways and reading the things he reads, doing the things he does, watching how he lives his life.
And so when he becomes transfigured, what he is offering us is not to say this is me and you're something different.
He's actually showing us a way.
And he's saying, I am showing you what transformation looks like.
I'm showing you the end product, really.
The goal of where you're trying to get to.
And then he sets about the path of discipleship.
And he says, just follow me.
Watch what I'm doing.
Make the motions that I'm making.
Make the steps that I'm making.
And if you can do this, you will find the ways of life and godliness.
And then Peter keeps talking.
And he says, through the knowledge of him who called us by his glory and by his excellence, and here I have to think he has in mind that fateful day on the Mount of Transfiguration, by which he has granted to us
His precious and very great promises.
Jesus is coming and He's offering us this way, this promise of life and life eternal.
So that through them, and here is the most scandalous line I've come across in the Bible in a very long time, if you allow it to be.
by which he has granted to us his precious and very great promises, so that through them, you may become partakers of the divine nature, so that you and I might become participant.
The word here, partaker, participant, this is actually the word Koinaniya.
We've had Koinaniya groups here, right?
You remember Koinaniya?
This is the coming together and having all things in common, right?
But this is a different kind of commonality.
It's a participation in God's very nature itself.
And what I think Peter is offering to us, saying to us, is I saw Jesus glorified on the Mount of Transfiguration that day.
I saw what it's supposed to all look like.
I have an image of where I want to go and where we're all trying to get to.
And God is calling us into that to participate in that kind of life, in the divine life itself, in God's very nature.
And we all know what God's nature is, right?
We've read Paul's fruit of the spirit, love and joy and peace and patience, et cetera.
Peter is going to give us a few of his own, his own version of what that looks like and what follows.
And so he goes on, he says, having escaped from the corruption that's in the world because of our sinful desire.
And here, again, he has to have in mind that we've got these dual natures battling it out within us, this worldly base nature, the sinful desire that is warring against the divine nature that God is calling us into.
and that Jesus himself has made a way to make it even possible to get there.
And all of this requires what?
Transformation, metamorphosis, the changing from a caterpillar into a butterfly.
This is what he's talking about.
So he goes on, for this very reason, make every effort to supplement your
Note where he begins.
He starts with the faith piece because this is where it all begins.
It starts with faith.
It starts by saying, yes, Jesus, I trust you.
You've got the goods.
You've got the way.
I saw you on the Mount of Transfiguration.
I saw the end.
I believe that.
And now I'm ready to start the journey.
I'm ready to start following.
I'm ready to call you my chef and I'll be your sous chef, right?
And he goes on and he says,
Make every effort to supplement your faith with virtue and then your virtue with knowledge.
And this one actually is gnosis this time.
It's like putting the right things in your head and knowledge with self control and self control with steadfastness and steadfastness with godliness and godliness with brotherly love or brotherly affection, Philadelphia.
And finally,
Adding to that is agape, love.
For if these qualities are yours and are increasing, I love this idea, if these qualities are yours and they are increasing, well, they keep you from being ineffective or unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is to say in the apprenticeship, in the deep knowledge,
In the way of being Jesus as he is our master and we are his follower, for whoever lacks these qualities is nearsighted.
He's blind, in fact.
And what has he lost?
What has he forgotten?
Well, he has forgotten that he was cleansed from his former sins.
There is so much in this passage.
I'm gonna be honest with you.
This is one of these passages where I jumped into it and I thought I was gonna say one thing and then it kept going.
And there's like layer upon layer of what is happening here and is worthy of your reflection.
And my guess is I could keep talking for like another two hours and it's just gonna flood the system.
And so my request of you is that you take this passage home with you.
and you read through it in earnest, what is the 70-year-old Peter trying to say to you after a lifetime of someone who's been transformed by the power of the Holy Spirit by being in contact with Jesus, his Lord, and being trained by Jesus over a lifetime, he's saying, well, it should look like an increasing kind of spiritual life.
an increasing kind of virtue.
Your character should be different at age 70 than it was at age 18.
Peter himself, I think it's funny, he uses the examples he does.
And the reason is because he's lived them.
He uses the example of self-control.
And if you know Peter, when you meet him in the gospels, he's like the opposite of self-control.
He's the guy who jumps out of the boat way too quickly.
He's the guy who when some soldier comes after Jesus, he slices his ear off.
He's a guy without self-control.
But over a lifetime of being mentored by Jesus, discipled by Jesus, transformed by Jesus.
He's a man standing there saying, your self-control matters deeply.
We even see it actually.
in Acts 4 where he has a tremendous amount of self-control in front of the Sanhedrin.
Or he says, steadfastness, right?
This is another one of his virtues here.
You should be a steadfast kind of person, says the guy who three times before the rooster crows denies Jesus.
He's the opposite of steadfast, right?
When the going off, Peter got going.
He left.
But after years, decades, nation, he's coming to you and to me.
He's saying, we need to be steadfast kind of people.
I wasn't always this way.
But for a lifetime, I have been trained in the ways of Jesus.
Brotherly love.
His understanding of like what a brother was was very small, very small.
He thought a brother was like his other Jewish comrades.
And he had to learn that when that sheet comes down in Acts 10, and God says, no, no, no, all things are sacred.
There is no such thing as that which is impure and pure.
And he opens up the table to the Gentiles.
He has to expand what it means to live with brotherly love.
And so again, over the course of a lifetime,
He is transformed by the person of Jesus.
Therefore, brothers, verse 10, be all the more diligent to confirm your calling and election for if you practice these qualities, you will never fail.
For in this way, there will be richly provided for you an entrance into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.
I heard a stat this week that should cause every one of us to sit up and to grow very concerned about the state of the church in the United States and the world.
The stat goes like this, a Barna study shows that only 8% of millennials who were raised Christian, we're not talking 8% of everybody, we're talking about 8% of millennials who were raised Christian
in the church qualify as what Barnacle's resilient disciples, resilient disciples, which they then quantify as they attend church just once a month and engage with their faith community in that way.
They trust firmly in the authority of Scripture.
They're committed to Jesus personally, and a firm is death and resurrection.
and they express a desire to let their faith shape their interaction with the culture.
8% folks.
That is an astonishing number.
Again, this is not 8% of the whole culture.
It would be much lower than that.
This is 8% of those who grew up in church.
The church does not have a gnosis problem, an information problem, a knowledge problem.
It has a formation problem.
It has an epignosis problem.
We have all of the resources we could ever want with all of the information we could ever want, streaming on those devices that sit in our pockets.
And if you wanted knowledge, it's sitting there all day long, ready to be pumped into your brain.
That is not our trouble.
Information is not our trouble.
formation, formation.
Who are we being formed into?
Ultimately, transformation is our problem.
And this is not just the kids.
It's not just the millennials.
It's not the Gen Xers.
It's not the boomers.
It's all of us.
What are we being formed into?
Is it?
Peter says things like
steadfastness and self-control?
Or is it something else?
When I think about what South Run should be, there's lots of things.
The church should be lots of things, by the way, but it is a hospital.
One of the ways in which the church has been cast is a hospital for the sick and the ability to bring people in and to revive them to health.
But if I could add a layer to that, I'd love for it to be a school of transformation, like a place where you could go and you would know that, okay, well, there's a path here for me.
I know now because I have this community and these resources, I know how to grow in the ways of Jesus.
I have mentors ready to breathe life into me and show me the way.
I have a small group who's ready to hold me accountable.
I have people around me who are ready to show me the better way so that we don't end up with an 8% of folks walking through our church who are, what do they call them, resilient disciples, but that number is far higher.
I would love for us to be known as a school for transformation.
I'll be honest though.
I don't know that anyone, and I really mean anyone has to give this out.
And by anyone, I mean like churches in this day and age.
I hear a lot of pastors talking about this exact problem for the reasons the stats kind of bring out.
There isn't like a model that's sitting out there.
And so maybe what I'm asking from you is how can you and I partner together?
How can we all come together and say, this is really important.
We want to be the kind of church that doesn't just like gather on Sundays so we can check that box, but like we want to be a church that actually changes people, like changes real lives, helps people to grow into who they should be and what God wants for them into the image of God that they were designed to always be.
Exactly how we do that.
What that looks like probably depends on the person, but I'd love for us to be a church that is like that.
I think this is what God is calling us into.
And as I'm thinking about a year of transformation, this is like right here at the front of my mind.
Let's pray together.
Father in heaven, I'm gripped by the fact that our culture is slowly walking away.
And even our church culture, Lord, is drifting from ways of being Christ followers that I think we all assumed were just there.
But over the years, we have found our ways down other roads.
But God, it need not be this way.
You have given the church
as your bride for 2,000 years now to be that hospital or that school for transformation or that place where you dwell, the body of Christ itself, working the ways of Christ in the world.
God, I pray that South Run be that kind of place.
And Lord, for each person in here, the message that they take away is their message.
Because at the very least, at the very least, you are calling them into a life of transformation.
This isn't a season.
This isn't a moment.
This is a life ever increasing, ever increasing.
So one day we meet you in glory.
We see you face to face.
We're drawn into your presence and the fullness we all desire.
God, as we go out this week, about our business, it's so easy to get trapped up in the ways of the world.
Things that pull us down into the depths, that teach us to rise above, to see the world as you see it, and to live transformed lives.
Christ's Holy Name.